docs: Added Thanos Go style guide and some development tips. (#2359)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/contributing/coding-style-guide.md

---
title: Coding Style guide
type: docs
menu: contributing
---

# Thanos Coding Style Guide.

> This document explains the official style guides for various languages we use in the Thanos project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document details the official style guides for the various languages we use in the Thanos project.
```

> Feel free to familiarize and refer this during code reviews. If something in our codebase does not match the style, it means it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to familiarize yourself with and refer to this document during code reviews. If something in our codebase does not match the style, it means it
```

> was missed or it was done before this document. Help wanted to fix it! (:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was missed or it was written before this document. Help wanted to fix it! (:
```

> Generally we care for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally we care about:
```

* Readability, so low [Cognitive Load](https://www.dabapps.com/blog/cognitive-load-programming/).
* Maintainability. We avoid the code that **surprises**.
* Performance only for critical path and without compromising readability.
* Testability. Even if it means some changes to the production code, like `timeNow func() time.Time` mock.

> * Consistency: If some pattern repeats, it means less surprises.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Consistency: If some pattern repeats, it means fewer surprises.
```

> NOTE: Some style is ensured by our linters. This is not covered by this document. We only cover things that we did not setup linters yet for (:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: some style is enforced by our linters and is not covered by this document. We only cover things for which we do not yet have have linters (:
```

## Go

> For code written in [Go](https://golang.org/) we use standard Go style guides ([1](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html),[2](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments)) with few additional rules that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For code written in [Go](https://golang.org/), we use the standard Go style guides ([1](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html),[2](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments)) with a few additional rules that
```

> makes certain areas more strict than standard guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make certain areas more strict than the standard guides.
```

> ### Only two ways of formatting functions/methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Only Two Ways of Formatting Functions/Methods
```

> Prefer either one line function/method definition arguments. If it's too wide, split it in following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prefer function/method definitions with arguments in a single line. If it's too wide, put each argument on a new line in following way:
```

```go
func function(
   a int,
   b string,
   c int,
) (ret int, err error)
```

> ### Control Structure: Avoid else

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Control Structure: Avoid `else`
```

> In most of the cases you don't need `else`. Usually you can use `continue`, `break` or `return` to end `if` body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most of the cases you don't need `else`. You can usually use `continue`, `break` or `return` to end an `if` block.
```

> This allows to have one less indent and consistency, so code is more readable. Consider following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables having one less indent and netter consistency so code is more readable. Consider the following example:
```

```go
for _, elem := range elems {
    if a == 1 {
        something[i] = "yes"
    } else {
    	something[i] = "no"
    }
}

```

We prefer following alternative without `else`:

```go
for _, elem := range elems {
    if a == 1 {
        something[i] = "yes"
        continue
    }

    something[i] = "no"
}

```

> ### Avoid globals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Avoid Globals
```

No globals other than `const` are allowed. Period.

Never use `init` functions.

### Prints.

> Never use `print`. Always use passed `go-kit/log.Logger`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Never use `print`. Always use a passed `go-kit/log.Logger`
```

> ### Use name result/return parameters carefully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use Named Result/Return Parameters Carefully
```

> It's ok to name return parameters if the types are not giving the details what function actually returns. Another use case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's OK to name return parameters if the types do not give enough information about what function actually returns. Another use case
```

> is when you want to define variable (e.g slice).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is when you want to define a variable, e.g a slice.
```

> **IMPORTANT:** Never use just "unadorned" `return`. This makes it's implicit what values are actually returned, thus more prone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**IMPORTANT:** Never use naked `return` statements with named returns. This makes what values are actually returned implicit and thus more prone
```

to surprises.

> ### Explicitly handled return errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Explicitly Handled Return Errors
```

> Always address returned errors. It does not mean you cannot "ignore" err for some reason (e.g if we know implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always address returned errors. It does not mean you cannot "ignore" the error for some reason, e.g if we know implementation
```

> will not return anything meaningful). You can, but do it explicitly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will not return anything meaningful You can ignore the error, but do so explicitly:
```

> `_ = someMethodThatReturnsError`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_ = someMethodThatReturnsError()`
```

> The exception: Well known cases like this like `level.Debug|Warn` etc and `fmt.FPrint*`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exception: well known cases such as `level.Debug|Warn` etc and `fmt.FPrint*`
```

> ### Defers: Dont' forget to check returned errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Defers: Dont' Forget to Check Returned Errors
```

Reviewer 2: Also:
`s/Dont'/Don't/`

> It's easy to forget about checking the error of some Close method that we defer e.g:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's easy to forget to check the error returned by a `Close` method that we deferred e.g:
```

```go
f, err := os.Open(...)
if err != nil {
    // handle..
}

// do...

> defer f.Close() // What if error happens here?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defer f.Close() // What if error an occurs here?
```

```

> Not checked error like this can lead to major bugs. Consider above example, the `*os.File` Close can be responsible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unchecked errors like this can lead to major bugs. Consider the above example: the `*os.File`  `Close` method can be responsible
```

> for actually flush to the file, so if error happens at that point, the whole write might be aborted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for actually flushing to the file, so if error occurs at that point, the whole write might be aborted.
```

> Always check error using our [runutil](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/thanos-io/thanos@v0.11.0/pkg/runutil?tab=doc) helper package e.g:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always check errors using our [runutil](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/thanos-io/thanos@v0.11.0/pkg/runutil?tab=doc) helper package, e.g.:
```

> If you want to error function on close error (make sure `error` return argument is named as `err`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to error the function on a deferred `Close` error (make sure the `error` return argument is named `err`):
```

```go
defer runutil.CloseWithErrCapture(&err, f, "close file")
```

> If you want to just log on error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you just want to log on error:
```

```go
defer runutil.CloseWithLogOnErr(logger, f, "close file")
```

> ### Exhaust readers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Exhaust Readers
```

> One of the most common bugs is forgetting to close or fully read bodies of http requests and responses, especially on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most common bugs is forgetting to close or fully read the bodies of HTTP requests and responses, especially on
```

> error. If you read body of such structures, you can use [runutil](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/thanos-io/thanos@v0.11.0/pkg/runutil?tab=doc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error. If you read body of such structures, you can use the [runutil](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/thanos-io/thanos@v0.11.0/pkg/runutil?tab=doc)
```

helper as well:

```go
defer runutil.ExhaustCloseWithLogOnErr(logger, resp.Body, "close file")
```

> ### Wrap errors for more context. Don't repeat "failed ..." there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Wrap Errors for More Context. Don't Repeat "failed ..." There.
```

> We use https://github.com/pkg/errors for errors. Use it to wrap errors for future context when errors happens. It's recommended

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use https://github.com/pkg/errors for errors. Use it to wrap errors for future context when errors occur. It's recommended
```

> to add more interesting variables like e.g file names, id of things that fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to add more interesting variables, e.g. file names, IDs of things that fail, etc.
```

> NOTE: Never use `failed ... ` prefix for the wrap messages. Just describe what we wanted to do when fails. Consider following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: never use the prefix `failed ... ` for the wrap messages. Just describe what we wanted to do when the failure occurred. Consider following example:
```

```go
if err != nil {
    return errors.Wrapf(err, "error while reading from file %s", f.Name)
}
```

> This is very unnecessary context. We are wrapping error, so it's obvious that some error happened. Improve readability and consider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is very context. We are wrapping an error, so it's obvious that some error ocurred. Improve readability and consider
```

replacing above with this:

```go
if err != nil {
    return errors.Wrapf(err, "read file %s", f.Name)
}
```

> ### Never use panics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Never Use Panics
```

> Never use them. If some dependency use it, use [recover](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html#recover).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Never use them. If some dependency use it, use [recover](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html#recover). Also consider avoiding that dependency.
```

Author: XDDDDDD

Author: Love it.

> ### Pre-allocating slices and maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pre-allocating Slices and Maps
```

Try to always preallocate slices and map either via cap or length. If you know the number elements you want to put into the
new slice or map use following code:

> `make([]MyType, 0, len(elems))` and `make(map[string]MyType, len(elems))`. This significantly improves latency of such code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`make([]MyType, 0, len(elems))` and `make(map[string]MyType, len(elems))`. This significantly improves the latency of such code.
```

Consider this as micro optimization. It's only relevant for critical code paths. In such cases you might want to think about
reusing arrays.

> ### Don't use reflect or unsafe packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Don't Use the `reflect` or `unsafe` Packages
```

Use those only for very specific, critical cases.
For testing code it's fine to use reflect.

> ### Use blank identifier `_`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use the Blank Identifier `_`
```

> Black identifiers are very useful to mark variables that are not used. Consider following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Black identifiers are very useful to mark variables that are not used. Consider following the cases:
```

```go

> a, _, err := function1(...) // We don't need second return parameter, let's use blank instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a, _, err := function1(...) // If we don't need second return parameter, let's use blank instead.
```

```

```go

> var _ InterfaceA = TypeA // We don't need to use this variable, we just want to make sure TypeA implements InterfaceA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
var _ InterfaceA = TypeA // We don't need to use this variable; we just want to make sure TypeA implements InterfaceA.
```

```

```go

> func (t *Type) SomeMethod(_ context.Context, abc int) error { // We don't use context argument, let's use blank identifier to make it clear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func (t *Type) SomeMethod(_ context.Context, abc int) error { // We don't use the context argument; let's use the blank identifier to make it clear.
```

```

> ### Tests for packages / structs that involve time package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tests for Packages/Structs That Involve the `time` Package.
```

> Avoid unit testing based on real time. Always try to mock time that is used within struct by using for example `timeNow func() time.Time` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoid unit testing based on real time. Always try to mock the time that is used within a struct, for example by using a `timeNow func() time.Time` field.
```

> For production code you can initialise it with `time.Now`. For test code you can set custom time that will be used by struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For production code, you can initialize the field with `time.Now`. For test code, you can set a custom time that will be used by the struct.
```

## Bash

> Overall try to NOT use bash. For script that has more than 30 lines, consider writing it in Go as we did [here](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/copyright/copyright.go).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall try to NOT use bash. For scripts longer than 30 lines, consider writing it in Go as we did [here](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/copyright/copyright.go).
```

> If you have to, we follow Google Shell style guide: https://google.github.io/styleguide/shellguide.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have to, we follow the Google Shell style guide: https://google.github.io/styleguide/shellguide.html
```

<tbody>
<tr><td>

```go
var messages []string{}
for _, msg := range recv {
    messages = append(messages, msg)

    if len(messages) > maxMessageLen {
        marshalAndSend(messages)
        // Instead of new array, reuse
        // the same, with the same capacity,
        // just length equals to zero.
        messages = messages[:0]
    }
}
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

### Readability

#### Only Two Ways of Formatting Functions/Methods

Prefer function/method definitions with arguments in a single line. If it's too wide, put each argument on a new line.

<table>
<thead align="center"><tr><th>Avoid 🔥</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>

```go
func function(argument1 int, argument2 string,
    argument3 time.Duration, argument4 someType,
    argument5 float64, argument6 time.Time,
) (ret int, err error) {
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>
<table>
<thead align="center"><tr><th>Better 🤓</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>

```go
func function(
    argument1 int,
    argument2 string,
    argument3 time.Duration,
    argument4 someType,
    argument5 float64,
    argument6 time.Time,
) (ret int, err error)
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

> #### Control Structure: Avoid `else`

Reviewer 4: This one is commonly referred to as "Early returns".

How about?
```suggestion
#### Control Structure: Prefer early returns (Avoid `else`)
```

Author: :+1:

    }
    something[i] = "no"
}
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

#### Use Named Return Parameters Carefully

It's OK to name return parameters if the types do not give enough information about what function or method actually returns.
Another use case is when you want to define a variable, e.g. a slice.

**IMPORTANT:** never use naked `return` statements with named return perameters. This compiles but it makes returning values
implicit and thus more prone to surprises.

#### Explicitly Handled Return Errors

Always address returned errors. It does not mean you cannot "ignore" the error for some reason, e.g. if we know implementation
will not return anything meaningful. You can ignore the error, but do so explicitly:

<table>
<thead align="center"><tr><th>Avoid 🔥</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>

```go
someMethodThatReturnsError(...)
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>
<table>
<thead align="center"><tr><th>Better 🤓</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>

```go
_ = someMethodThatReturnsError(...)
```

</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

The exception: well known cases such as `level.Debug|Warn` etc and `fmt.FPrint*`

#### Wrap Errors for More Context; Don't Repeat "failed ..." There.

> We use [`pkg/errors`](https://github.com/pkg/errors) package for `errors`. We prefer it over standard wrapping with `fmt.Sprintf` + `%w`,

Reviewer 4: I would disagree here. I don't think it's that bad and there are linters to check for %w usage (something by Fatih). Additionally, I would prefer using upstream. IIRC errors package itself is starting to use the new errors API on newer Go version under the hood.

Reviewer 5: AFAIK `pkg/errors` started to support new errors API, not using it under the hood. Also `pkg/errors` still offers more feature, like error stacks which Thanos benefits a lot, I believe. The std errors not there yet. However, there's nothing wrong to combine them, just preference.

Reviewer 4: Good point on more features. I guess for a project as invested into `pkg/errors` and still being compatible with stdlib it makes sense to keep using it.
For new projects, I started using only stdlib errors. :)

Author: Thanks for starting this discussion, I remember you like the standard one. (: There are lots of controversial things around the standard `errors` package. I am personally not a fan of the new changes to the `errors` and the same is with the community (I remember @peterbourgon was tweeting about it). I am happy to elaborate more on why the standard package is to me, just wrong and worse (for now) than `pkg/errors`:

1. You are maybe right that the are some linters for `%w`. But I would argue that something assured on compile time is always better than run time or pre run-time static analysis.
1. As I mentioned you can easily end up with inconsistent wraps. A developer can put `%w` literally **everywhere**. You can do:
   * `fmt.Errorf("failed to close file: %w, err)`
   * `fmt.Errorf("failed to close file %w, err)`
   * `fmt.Errorf("failed to close file. Err: %w, err)`
   * ... thousands of other non lintable inconsistencies.
1. `pkg/errors` does not add many features, and TBH that's good to not have feature creep. The only features we want is really `%+v` which gives you stack trace for the error. 
1. I just find `fmt.*` too close to `fmt.Print` `fmt.Sprintf` for string formatting, not error wrapping. It just surprises me every time I read `fmt.Errors` : but it might be personal brain malfunction ;p
1. To me `errors` have two ways of doing the same thing: `As` and `Is`.  Having a single package with only a few functions and already such clear code smell... Is interesting. (: I might not see `As` use case, as well. I would love it if someone could educate me why such an odd decision was made, but probably there were some important facts I am missing was there.
1. Since it's standard and has to be compatible with Go 1.0 velocity of  `errors` is poor, so nothing important will be improved there. So to me being a standard package is not really a benefit ): 

On the contrary:

* `pkg/error` has similar flaws in terms of two ways for same thing e.g `Unwrap`)
* `pkg/errors` is still more popular, so any dependency which uses that will not work with `As` and `Is`... HOWEVER recently with the new version they reverted the most important change: https://github.com/pkg/errors/pull/220 :scream: (it conflicts with unused by as `Unwrap` method) This means that either:
* We should never update `pkg/errors` ;p (bad)
* We should just copy those few lines and use internally (bad)
* We should use well maintained https://github.com/friendsofgo/errors fork. (best)

So it's not black and white but TBH I would propose https://github.com/friendsofgo/errors  (: it looks like we trust those maintainers, they seem a bit more reasonable. But again, it's maybe bit bigger decision, so I would stick to `pkg/errors` for now as without upgrading to 0.9.0 it's really the same for us: https://github.com/friendsofgo/errors

Reviewer 6: Like it or not, stdlib errors and wrapping with %w is the future. You should be using it.

Author: Hah. "Like or not, we will die at some point" (: 

Why not making future brighter? At least starting by our own code and explaining why the standard way is bit worse? (:

Reviewer 4: > Gofmt's style is no one's favorite, yet gofmt is everyone's favorite.

I guess that might be true for the errors implementation going forward. Personally, I have no problems with it.
The discussion point was mostly a compatibility one. As Thanos is heavily invested in pkg/errors and there is interoperability with the new errors built-in functionality, I'm fine with sticking to pkg/errors for the meantime and evaluate in the future once more.

Reviewer 6: > Why not making future brighter? At least starting by our own code and explaining why the standard way is bit worse?

I guess it's fine if you want to suggest a helper package that extends stdlib package errors with other stuff you want to use, as long as it doesn't wrap, unwrap, annotate, check, compare, etc. errors in an incompatible way. But you're still going to need to know how "normal" error wrapping, unwrapping, etc. works.

> To me errors have two ways of doing the same thing: As and Is.

Not exactly. [See here for more detail](http://peter.bourgon.org/blog/2019/09/11/programming-with-errors.html).

Author: Cool, can agree with you. Let's move this discussion to separate place, but I would vote for `errors.Wrap` extension that will be fully on top of std errors :hugs:
